📝(content) Storage ballooning: a novel solution (#612)
chromeos/chromeos.dev: site/en/posts/storage-ballooning-a-novel-solution.md

In the past, we created the VM user data image as a file on the host's [ext4](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Ext4) file system, which was exported into the VM as a [Btrfs](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Btrfs) file system via [`virtio-blk`](https://projectacrn.github.io/latest/developer-guides/hld/virtio-blk.html). This entailed having two—potentially different—views of the underlying device.

The challenge, then, was to ensure that both views were accurate and both clients (host and VM) could access the disk resources that they needed. When we started work on Borealis, we used image files that were sparsely allocated; we would [`truncate`](https://man7.org/linux/man-pages/man2/ftruncate.2.html) the image file, rather than allocating physical space for it.

So, while the VM appeared to have access to a large amount of storage, the underlying storage layer (ie. the host file system) only allocated space once required. Truncating, rather than allocating, meant that the host also had access to this space.

> ![Diagram showing how a sparse image on the host file system maps to the file system in the guest (VM). The guest file system shows storage used by the guest and the remaining storage space as available. The guest file system is backed by a sparse image file on the host which is sized to be as large as the entire system, but only takes up physical space equal to how much space is being used by the guest. The host file system shows the space used by the guest and the host, and what's available. The guest file system's available storage doesn't take into account the host's space usage.](insert_image_url_here)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
![Diagram showing how a sparse image on the host file system maps to the file system in the guest (VM). The guest file system shows storage used by the guest and the remaining storage space as available. The guest file system is backed by a sparse image file on the host which is sized to be as large as the entire system, but only takes up physical space equal to how much space is being used by the guest. The host file system shows the space used by the guest and the host, and what's available. The guest file system's available storage doesn't take into account the host's space usage.](ix://posts/storage-ballooning-a-novel-solution/sparse.png)
```

## Previous solutions: fixed-size disks and APIs

To avoid these issues, we worked on building a solution based on fixed-size disks—preallocating space for the entire image file.

While this design guaranteed that requests from the VM would always succeed, it was also somewhat inflexible: the VM was limited by the amount of storage space allocated to it. Additionally, the host could not reclaim space from the VM, even if the VM only occupied a fraction of the disk space it had been allocated.

This could be somewhat remedied by giving users the ability to manually resize their VM disk when needed—similar to what Crostini, the ChromeOS Linux VM, does. But it was bad in terms of usability; we'd much rather the user not need to tinker with settings like this.

> ![Diagram showing space usage by a guest (VM) and a host file system with an allocated image. The guest file system shows the space it uses and what's available, but the total of both is only a fraction of what's available on the host. The host shows the space available, the space it uses, and the total amount of space for the guest, both used and available, as an unavailable block.](insert_image_url_here)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
![Diagram showing space usage by a guest (VM) and a host file system with an allocated image. The guest file system shows the space it uses and what's available, but the total of both is only a fraction of what's available on the host. The host shows the space available, the space it uses, and the total amount of space for the guest, both used and available, as an unavailable block.](ix://posts/storage-ballooning-a-novel-solution/allocated.png)
```

## Our new solution: storage ballooning

Inspired by memory ballooning, we've designed a novel solution which is active on Borealis today: _storage ballooning_. Storage ballooning leverages a sparsely allocated image file and a "balloon" file in the VM, which artificially limits the VM's access to storage. We monitor how much space is available on the host and then inflate or deflate the balloon file in the VM, so the VM file utilization accounts for the utilization of the host—ensuring that both clients have an accurate depiction of storage resources.

Storage ballooning lets us leverage the space-sharing efficiency of sparse images while still maintaining correctness between the file systems and mostly avoid overprovisioning.

> ![Diagram showing space usage by a guest (VM) and a host filesystem with a storage balloon. Here, both the guest and the host show the same amount of space used by the guest, and the same amount of total available space on the file system. The host shows the space it uses, and in the guest, there's a storage balloon taking up the same amount of space as is used by the host. Space used by the guest goes through a sparse image.](insert_image_url_here)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
![Diagram showing space usage by a guest (VM) and a host filesystem with a storage balloon. Here, both the guest and the host show the same amount of space used by the guest, and the same amount of total available space on the file system. The host shows the space it uses, and in the guest, there's a storage balloon taking up the same amount of space as is used by the host. Space used by the guest goes through a sparse image.](ix://posts/storage-ballooning-a-novel-solution/balloon.png)
```
